[Docs] Add alerts description (#5882)
mlrun/mlrun: docs/concepts/alerts.md

(alerts)=

> # Alerts 

Reviewer: we should add in this section a description for each of the alert config fields.

Author: added link to SDK

> Alerts are a mechanism for informing you about possible problem situations. The Alerts page in the UI shows the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alerts are a mechanism for informing the user about possible problem situations. The Alerts page in the UI shows the 
```

Reviewer: another comment here - the UI side is still not implemented, so no need to mention it for now

Author: The docs use 1st person ("you") to speak to the reader, and not "the user."

list of configured alerts, and indicates which are active. In this page, you can acknowledge, 
delete, and modify alerts and also reset them. 

> Notifications are used to notify you or the system of an alert, such as through slack, git or webhook. See {ref}`notifications`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notifications are used to notify the user or the system of an alert, such as through slack, git or webhook. See {ref}`notifications`.
```

Author: as above, this is intentional

These are the variables that control the basic alert behavior: 

- `alerts.mode` &mdash; Enables/disables the feature. Enabled by default.
- `alerts.max_allowed` &mdash; Maximum number of alerts allowed to be configured, by default 10000. Any new alerts above this limit return an error.
- `alerts.max_criteria_count` &mdash; Maximum number of events. By default, 100.

These values can be modified by the [support team](mailto:support@iguazio.com).

## SDK

The SDK supports these alert operations:

- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.store_alert_config` &mdash; Create/modify an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.get_alert_config` &mdash;  Retrieve an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.reset_alert_config` &mdash; Reset an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.delete_alert_config` &mdash; Delete an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.get_alert_template` &mdash; Retrieve a specific alert template.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.list_alert_templates` &mdash; Retrieve the list of all alert templates.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.list_alerts_configs` &mdash; Retrieve the list of alerts of a project.

> ## Alert templates

Reviewer: we should add in this section a description for each of the alert template fields.

Author: added link to SDK

Alert templates simplify the creation of alerts by providing a predefined set of configurations. The system comes with several 
predefined templates that can be used with MLRun applications. 
If you use non-MLRun applications (for example, with model monitoring), you must configure an application-specific alert. 
The templates are cross-project objects. When generating an alert, the user must assign the project to it. The predefined alerts are:

> - DATA_DRIFT_DETECTED &mdash; A detected change in model input data that potentially leads to model performance degradation. See {ref}`monitoring-overview`.

Reviewer: this section is not related to the alert template, maybe need to be in a separate section ?

- MODEL_PERFORMANCE_DETECTED &mdash; A detected change of the overall model performance and/or feature-level performance. See {ref}`monitoring-overview`.
- MODEL_PERFORMANCE_SUSPECTED &mdash; A suspected change of the overall model performance and/or feature-level performance. See {ref}`monitoring-overview`.
- MODEL_SERVING_PERFORMANCE_DETECTED &mdash; A detected change in how much time the prediction takes (i.e. the latency, measured in time units).
- MODEL_SERVING_PERFORMANCE_SUSPECTED &mdash; A suspected change in how much time the prediction takes (i.e. the latency, measured in time units).
- MM_APP_ANOMALY_DETECTED &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- MM_APP_ANOMALY_SUSPECTED &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- FAILED &mdash; The job failed.

## Creating an alert with a template

When you use a template, you only need to supply:
- name: str
- project: str
- entity: EventEntity from the list in [Alert templates](#alert-templates)
- {py:func}`~mlrun.common.schemas.notification.NotificationKind`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates configuring a Slack notification for a job failure alert, using the predefined system template "JobFailed":
```

```python
job_fail_template = project.get_alert_template("JobFailed")
alert_from_template = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(
    project=project_name,
    name="failure",
    template=job_fail_template,
)
entities = alert_objects.EventEntities(
    kind=alert_objects.EventEntityKind.JOB,
    project=project_name,
    ids=[run_id],
)
alert_from_template.with_entities(entities=entities)

> alert_from_template.with_notifications(notifications=notifications)

Reviewer: need to define a notification for the job failure as you did in the example below with the drift detection..

Author: @Yacouby can you pls add the exact lines to add

Reviewer: notification = mlrun.model.Notification(
    kind="slack",
    name="slack_notification",
    secret_params={
        "webhook": "https://hooks.slack.com/",
    },
).to_dict()

notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]

project.store_alert_config(alert_from_template)
```

> ## Creating an alert without a template

Reviewer: please change the order here with the previous section, as the default behavior is creating an alert without a template.

You can select an alert type for a specific model, for example "drift detection" for a given model. You must specify 
the frequency of alerts, and the criteria for alerts (how many times in what time window, etc.). 

> You can also configure email/Slack details to send notifications.

Reviewer: email notifications are not supported ( at least for now ). we support Git, Slack, and webhook notifications.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates configuring a Slack notification for drift detection on a model endpoint:
```

These are the variables that control the basic alert behavior: 

- `alerts.mode` &mdash; Enables/disables the feature. Enabled by default.
- `alerts.max_allowed` &mdash; Maximum number of alerts allowed to be configured, by default 10000. Any new alerts above this limit return an error.
- `alerts.max_criteria_count` &mdash; Maximum number of events. By default, 100.

These values can be modified by the [support team](mailto:support@iguazio.com).

## SDK

The SDK supports these alert operations:

- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.store_alert_config` &mdash; Create/modify an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.get_alert_config` &mdash;  Retrieve an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.reset_alert_config` &mdash; Reset an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.delete_alert_config` &mdash; Delete an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.get_alert_template` &mdash; Retrieve a specific alert template.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.list_alert_templates` &mdash; Retrieve the list of all alert templates.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.list_alerts_configs` &mdash; Retrieve the list of alerts of a project.

> ## Alert templates

Reviewer: please move this sections to be before the "Creating an alert with a template" section

> ## Predefined alerts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Predefined events ( EvenKind )
```

- DATA_DRIFT_SUSPECTED &mdash; A suspected change in model input data that potentially leads to model performance degradation. 
- CONCEPT_DRIFT_DETECTED &mdash; A detected change, over time, of  statistical properties of the target variable (what the model is predicting). 
- CONCEPT_DRIFT_SUSPECTED &mdash; A suspected change, over time, of  statistical properties of the target variable (what the model is predicting). 
- MODEL_PERFORMANCE_DETECTED &mdash; A detected change of the overall model performance and/or feature-level performance. 
- MODEL_PERFORMANCE_SUSPECTED &mdash; A suspected change of the overall model performance and/or feature-level performance. 
- MODEL_SERVING_PERFORMANCE_DETECTED &mdash; A detected change in how much time the prediction takes (i.e. the latency, measured in time units).
- MODEL_SERVING_PERFORMANCE_SUSPECTED &mdash; A suspected change in how much time the prediction takes (i.e. the latency, measured in time units).
- MM_APP_ANOMALY_DETECTED &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- MM_APP_ANOMALY_SUSPECTED &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- FAILED &mdash; The job failed.

> 

Reviewer 2: the examples need to be equal to the inputs the user will use - to allow user to copy and paste from the example

Reviewer: @jillnogold please refer to the events defined here :
https://github.com/mlrun/mlrun/blob/c5d11b41dc427720735de2cf2b0c550eb55d8b58/mlrun/common/schemas/alert.py#L35

also, what @GiladShapira94 meant here is to write the events in smaller case.

Author: changed to lower case

- MODEL_SERVING_PERFORMANCE_DETECTED &mdash; A detected change in how much time the prediction takes (i.e. the latency, measured in time units).
- MODEL_SERVING_PERFORMANCE_SUSPECTED &mdash; A suspected change in how much time the prediction takes (i.e. the latency, measured in time units).
- MM_APP_ANOMALY_DETECTED &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- MM_APP_ANOMALY_SUSPECTED &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- FAILED &mdash; The job failed.

> ## Creating an alert without a template

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating an alert
```
as this is the basic behavior, so no need to specify that it is without a template

```python
notification = mlrun.model.Notification(
    kind="slack",
    name="slack_notification",
    message="A drift was detected",
    severity="warning",
    when=["now"],
    condition="failed",
    secret_params={
        "webhook": "https://hooks.slack.com/",
    },
).to_dict()

endpoints = mlrun.get_run_db().list_model_endpoints(project=project_name)
endpoint_id = endpoints[0].metadata.uid
result_endpoint = get_result_instance_fqn(endpoint_id, "myappv2", "data_drift_test")
notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]
alert_name = "drift_alert"
alert_summary = "A drift was detected"
entity_kind = alert_objects.EventEntityKind.MODEL_ENDPOINT_RESULT
event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.DATA_DRIFT_DETECTED
alert_data = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(
    project=project_name,
    name=alert_name,
    summary=alert_summary,
    severity=alert_objects.AlertSeverity.LOW,
    entities=alert_objects.EventEntities(
        kind=entity_kind, project=project_name, ids=[result_endpoint]
    ),
    trigger=alert_objects.AlertTrigger(events=[event_name]),
    criteria=None,
    notifications=notifications,
)

> 

Reviewer 2: maybe worth to add an example for a job, and explain about the reset policy and how to reset it 
can be in a note

Reviewer: @jillnogold add this example also to here :
```suggestion
Another example which illustrates a Slack notification for job failure:
notification = mlrun.model.Notification(
            kind="slack",
            name="slack_notification",
            message="Running a job has failed",
            severity="warning",
            when=["now"],
            condition="failed",
            secret_params={
                "webhook": "https://hooks.slack.com/",
            },
        ).to_dict()
notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]
alert_name="failure_alert"
alert_summary="Running a job has failed"
entity_kind = alert_objects.EventEntityKind.JOB
event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.FAILED
run_id="run-id"
alert_data = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(
            project=project_name,
            name=alert_name,
            summary=alert_summary,
            severity=alert_objects.AlertSeverity.HIGH,
            entities=alert_objects.EventEntities(
                kind=entity_kind, project=project_name, ids=[run_id]
            ),
            trigger=alert_objects.AlertTrigger(events=[event_name]),
            notifications=notifications,
        )
project.store_alert_config(alert_data)
```

project.store_alert_config(alert_data)
```
## Alert templates
Alert templates simplify the creation of alerts by providing a predefined set of configurations. The system comes with several 
predefined templates that can be used with MLRun applications. 
If you use non-MLRun applications (for example, with model monitoring), you must configure an application-specific alert. 
The templates are cross-project objects. When generating an alert, you must assign the project to it. 
See the {py:meth}`alert template parameters<mlrun.common.schemas.alert.AlertTemplate>`.

> 

Reviewer 2: maybe worth to add an example on how the user can check the templated and which default templates are created for each project

Reviewer: @jillnogold add another bullet here to explain what are all the predefined templates that we have.

## Creating an alert with a template

When you use a template, you only need to supply:
- name: str
- project: str

> - entity: EventEntity from the list in [Alert templates](#alert-templates)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- entity: EventEntity
```

> - {py:func}`~mlrun.common.schemas.notification.NotificationKind`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- notifications: list[Notification]
```

(alerts)=
# Alerts 

Alerts are a mechanism for informing you about possible problem situations. 

{ref}`notifications` are used to notify you or the system of an alert.

**In this section**

> - [Configuration of alert behavior](#configuration-of-alert-behavior)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Alert configuration](#configuration-of-alert-behavior)
```

- [SDK](#sdk)
- [Predefined events](#predefined-eventseventkind)
- [Creating an alert](#creating-an-alert)
- [Alert reset policy](#alert-reset-policy)
- [Alert templates](#alert-templates)

> - [Creating an alert without a template](#creating-an-alert-with-a-template)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Creating an alert with a template](#creating-an-alert-with-a-template)
```

- `model_serving_performance_suspected` &mdash; A suspected change in how much time the prediction takes (i.e. the latency, measured in time units).
- `mm_app_anomaly_detected` &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- `mm_app_anomaly_suspected` &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- `failed` &mdash; The job failed.

See {ref}`monitoring-overview` for more details on drift and performance.

## Creating an alert
You can select an event type for a specific model, for example `data_drift_suspected`, for a given model. You can optionally specify 
the frequency of events, and the criteria for events (how many times in what time window, etc.). If not specified, it uses the defaults. 
See all of the {py:class}`alert configuration parameters<mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig>`. You can configure Git, Slack, and webhook notifications for the alert. 

This example illustrates a Slack notification for drift detection on a model endpoint:

```python
notification = mlrun.model.Notification(
    kind="slack",
    name="slack_notification",

>     message="A drift was detected",
>     severity="warning",
>     when=["now"],
>     condition="failed",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    secret_params={
        "webhook": "https://hooks.slack.com/",
    },
).to_dict()

endpoints = mlrun.get_run_db().list_model_endpoints(project=project_name)
endpoint_id = endpoints[0].metadata.uid
result_endpoint = get_result_instance_fqn(endpoint_id, "myappv2", "data_drift_test")
notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]
alert_name = "drift_alert"
alert_summary = "A drift was detected"
entity_kind = alert_objects.EventEntityKind.MODEL_ENDPOINT_RESULT
event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.DATA_DRIFT_DETECTED
alert_data = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(
    project=project_name,
    name=alert_name,
    summary=alert_summary,
    severity=alert_objects.AlertSeverity.LOW,
    entities=alert_objects.EventEntities(
        kind=entity_kind, project=project_name, ids=[result_endpoint]
    ),
    trigger=alert_objects.AlertTrigger(events=[event_name]),
    criteria=None,
    notifications=notifications,
)

project.store_alert_config(alert_data)
```

This example illustrates a Slack notification for a job failure:
```python
notification = mlrun.model.Notification(
    kind="slack",
    name="slack_notification",

>     message="Running a job has failed",
>     severity="warning",
>     when=["now"],
>     condition="failed",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

becomes inactive, its notifications cease. When it is re-activated, notifications are renewed.
The `ResetPolicy` options are:
- manual &mdash; for manual reset of the alert
- auto &mdash; if the criteria contains a time period such that the alert is reset once there are no more invocations in the relevant time window.

## Alert templates
Alert templates simplify the creation of alerts by providing a predefined set of configurations. The system comes with several 
predefined templates that can be used with MLRun applications. 
If you use non-MLRun applications (for example, with model monitoring), you must configure an application-specific alert. 
The templates are cross-project objects. When generating an alert, you must assign the project to it. 
See the {py:meth}`alert template parameters<mlrun.common.schemas.alert.AlertTemplate>`.

## Creating an alert with a template

The system has a few pre-defined templates: `JobFailed`, `DataDriftDetected`, `DataDriftSuspected`.
When using a pre-defined template, you only need to supply:
- name: str
- project: str
- entity: EventEntity
- NotificationKind: a list of at least one notification

> Do not confgure: summary, severity, trigger, or reset policy.

Reviewer: the user may choose to configure one of these fields ( or more )
```suggestion
While summary, severity, trigger, and reset policy are pre-configured in the template, you have the option to customize one or more of these fields when creating an alert from a template.
```

- `model_performance_detected` &mdash; A detected change of the overall model performance and/or feature-level performance. 
- `model_performance_suspected` &mdash; A suspected change of the overall model performance and/or feature-level performance. 
- `model_serving_performance_detected` &mdash; A detected change in how much time the prediction takes (i.e. the latency, measured in time units).
- `model_serving_performance_suspected` &mdash; A suspected change in how much time the prediction takes (i.e. the latency, measured in time units).
- `mm_app_anomaly_detected` &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- `mm_app_anomaly_suspected` &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- `failed` &mdash; The job failed.

See {ref}`monitoring-overview` for more details on drift and performance.

## Creating an alert
You can select an event type for a specific model, for example `data_drift_suspected`, for a given model. You can optionally specify 
the frequency of events, and the criteria for events (how many times in what time window, etc.). If not specified, it uses the defaults. 

> See all of the {py:class}`alert configuration parameters<mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig>`. You can configure Git, Slack, and webhook notifications for the alert. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating an alert you can select an event type for a specific model, for example `data_drift_suspected` or any one from the predefined events above.
You can optionally specify the frequency of the alert through the criteria field in the configuration (how many times in what time window, etc.).. If not specified, it uses the default.
See all of the {py:class}`alert configuration parameters<mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig>`. 
You can configure Git, Slack, and webhook notifications for the alert. 
```

> This example illustrates a Slack notification for drift detection on a model endpoint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example illustrates creating an alert with a Slack notification for drift detection on a model endpoint:
```

```python

> notification = mlrun.model.Notification(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# define the slack notification object
notification = mlrun.model.Notification(
```

    kind="slack",
    name="slack_notification",
    secret_params={
        "webhook": "https://hooks.slack.com/",
    },
).to_dict()

endpoints = mlrun.get_run_db().list_model_endpoints(project=project_name)
endpoint_id = endpoints[0].metadata.uid

> result_endpoint = get_result_instance_fqn(endpoint_id, "myappv2", "data_drift_test")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# generate a unique ID for the EventEntity
result_endpoint = get_result_instance_fqn(endpoint_id, "myappv2", "data_drift_test")
```

> notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# construct a list of notifications to be included in the alert config
notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]
```

alert_name = "drift_alert"

> alert_summary = "A drift was detected"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# the summary that we will see in the notification once it is invoked
alert_summary = "A drift was detected"
```

> entity_kind = alert_objects.EventEntityKind.MODEL_ENDPOINT_RESULT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# for model monitoring alerts we will choose the MODEL_ENDPOINT_RESULT
entity_kind = alert_objects.EventEntityKind.MODEL_ENDPOINT_RESULT
```

> event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.DATA_DRIFT_DETECTED

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# the event the we want the alert to be triggered on
event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.DATA_DRIFT_DETECTED
```

> alert_data = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# create the alert data to be passed to the store_alert_config function
alert_data = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(
```

    project=project_name,
    name=alert_name,
    summary=alert_summary,
    severity=alert_objects.AlertSeverity.LOW,
    entities=alert_objects.EventEntities(
        kind=entity_kind, project=project_name, ids=[result_endpoint]
    ),
    trigger=alert_objects.AlertTrigger(events=[event_name]),

>     criteria=None,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    notifications=notifications,
)

> project.store_alert_config(alert_data)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# and finally store the alert config in the project
project.store_alert_config(alert_data)
```

```

> This example illustrates a Slack notification for a job failure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example illustrates creating an alert with a Slack notification for a job failure, with a defined criteria, which means that the alert will be triggered once this job fails for 3 times in the next 10 minutes:
```

```python
notification = mlrun.model.Notification(
    kind="slack",
    name="slack_notification",
    secret_params={
        "webhook": "https://hooks.slack.com/",
    },
).to_dict()
notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]
alert_name = "failure_alert"
alert_summary = "Running a job has failed"
entity_kind = alert_objects.EventEntityKind.JOB
event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.FAILED

> run_id = "run-id"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# the job's run id that we want to track
run_id = "run-id"
```

alert_data = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(
    project=project_name,
    name=alert_name,
    summary=alert_summary,
    severity=alert_objects.AlertSeverity.HIGH,
    entities=alert_objects.EventEntities(
        kind=entity_kind, project=project_name, ids=[run_id]
    ),

>     trigger=alert_objects.AlertTrigger(events=[event_name]),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    trigger=alert_objects.AlertTrigger(events=[event_name]),
    criteria=alert_objects.AlertCriteria(period="10m", count=3)
```

- `mm_app_anomaly_detected` &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- `mm_app_anomaly_suspected` &mdash; An alert based on user-defined metrics/results.
- `failed` &mdash; The job failed.

See {ref}`monitoring-overview` for more details on drift and performance.

## Creating an alert
When creating an alert you can select an event type for a specific model, for example `data_drift_suspected` or any of the predefined events above.
You can optionally specify the frequency of the alert through the criteria field in the configuration (how many times in what time window, etc.). 
If not specified, it uses the default.
See all of the {py:class}`alert configuration parameters<mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig>`. 
You can configure Git, Slack, and webhook notifications for the alert. 

This example illustrates creating an alert with a Slack notification for drift detection on a model endpoint:

```python
# Define the slack notification object
notification = mlrun.model.Notification(
    kind="slack",
    name="slack_notification",
    secret_params={
        "webhook": "https://hooks.slack.com/",
    },
).to_dict()

> endpoints = mlrun.get_run_db().list_model_endpoints(project=project_name)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
endpoints = mlrun.get_run_db().list_model_endpoints(project=project_name)

```

> endpoint_id = endpoints[0].metadata.uid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
endpoint_id = endpoints[0].metadata.uid

```

# Generate a unique ID for the EventEntity

> result_endpoint = get_result_instance_fqn(endpoint_id, "myappv2", "data_drift_test")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
result_endpoint = get_result_instance_fqn(endpoint_id, "myappv2", "data_drift_test")

```

# Construct a list of notifications to be included in the alert config

> notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]

```

> alert_name = "drift_alert"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
alert_name = "drift_alert"

```

# The summary you will see in the notification once it is invoked

> alert_summary = "A drift was detected"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
alert_summary = "A drift was detected"

```

# Choose the MODEL_ENDPOINT_RESULT for the model monitoring alert

> entity_kind = alert_objects.EventEntityKind.MODEL_ENDPOINT_RESULT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
entity_kind = alert_objects.EventEntityKind.MODEL_ENDPOINT_RESULT

```

# The event that will trigger the alert

> event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.DATA_DRIFT_DETECTED

Reviewer: ```suggestion
event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.DATA_DRIFT_DETECTED

```

# Create the alert data to be passed to the store_alert_config function
alert_data = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(
    project=project_name,
    name=alert_name,
    summary=alert_summary,
    severity=alert_objects.AlertSeverity.LOW,
    entities=alert_objects.EventEntities(
        kind=entity_kind, project=project_name, ids=[result_endpoint]
    ),
    trigger=alert_objects.AlertTrigger(events=[event_name]),
    notifications=notifications,
)

# And finally store the alert config in the project
project.store_alert_config(alert_data)
```

This example illustrates creating an alert with a Slack notification for a job failure with defined criteria.
This alert gets triggered if the job fails 3 times in a 10 minute period.

```python
notification = mlrun.model.Notification(
    kind="slack",
    name="slack_notification",
    secret_params={
        "webhook": "https://hooks.slack.com/",
    },

> ).to_dict()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
).to_dict()

```

notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]
alert_name = "failure_alert"
alert_summary = "Running a job has failed"
entity_kind = alert_objects.EventEntityKind.JOB

> event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.FAILED

Reviewer: ```suggestion
event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.FAILED

```

# Alerts and events

> Events are alerts are the vehicle for informing you about possible problem situations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Events and alerts are mechanisms for informing the user about possible problem situations.
```

Reviewer 3: Events are not user visible. They are implementation details that have no connection to what the user sees. User interacts with alerts and notifications

> - Event &mdash; something that happens in the system. An event may be a raw event (for example, drift-detection job detects drift in a given model) or a calculated event based on other events (CPU for a job is over 70% for one hour)

Reviewer 3: The example of CPU over 70% may be a good idea, but it's not something that have been defined nor even close to being implemented in 1.7

- Alert &mdash; a situation where a combination of events happening needs to be notified to the user

>    - Alert config - the configuration defining the situation where an alert needs to be issued

Reviewer: should add here a description for each of the alert config fields.

>    - Active alert - an alert config that was triggered and is actively issuing notifications

Reviewer 3: We don't issue notifications periodically. We issue notifications once the alert becomes active

> - Notifications &mdash; A means of notifying a user or the system of an alert, such as email, but also by invoking another event. See {ref}`notifications`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Notifications &mdash; A way to notify the user or the system of an alert, such as through slack, git or webhook. See {ref}`notifications`.
```

## Alerts

### General configuration

> There are two variables that control the alerts behavior: (AlertConfig)

Reviewer 3: it's 3 variables :). Also, not sure how relevant AlertConfig is here as we are talking about general alerts behavior. Maybe "General configuration" is not the best title here. Maybe something like system config? Just thinking out loud

- `alerts.mode` Either “enabled” or “disabled” to enable/disable the feature.

> - `alerts.max_allowed` By default, 10000. Above this limit, any new alerts return an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `alerts.max_allowed` Maximum number of alerts allowed to be configured, by default: 10000. Any new alerts above this limit will return an error.
```

- `alerts.max_criteria_count` By default, 100. Maximum number of events 

These values can be modified by the [support team](mailto:support@iguazio.com).

> ### Alert templates

Reviewer: should add here a description for each of the alert template fields.

Author: added link to API

> Alerts use templates. The system comes with pre-defined templates. The pre-defined alerts can be used with MLRun applications. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alert templates simplify the creation of alerts by providing a predefined set of configurations. The system comes with several pre-defined templates that can be used with MLRun applications.
```

If you use non-MLRun applications (for example with model monitoring), you must configure an application-specific alert. 

> For the pre-defined alerts, all you have to do is assign the project to an alert (and optionally tweak the default values). The pre-defined alerts are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The templates are cross-project objects. When generating an alert, the user will have to assign the project to it. The pre-defined alerts are:
```

- data_drift_detected
- data_drift_suspected
- concept_drift_detected
- concept_drift_suspected
- model_performance_detected
- model_performance_suspected
- model_serving_performance_detected
- model_serving_performance_suspected
- mm_app_anomaly_detected
- mm_app_anomaly_suspected
- failed

### SDK

The SDK supports these alert operations:

- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.store_alert_config` &mdash; Create/modify an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.get_alert_config` &mdash;  Retrieve an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.reset_alert_config` &mdash; Reset an alert.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.delete_alert_config` &mdash; Delete an alert
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.get_alert_template` &mdash; Retrieve a specific alert template.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.list_alert_templates` &mdash; Retrieve the list of all alert templates.
- {py:func}`~mlrun.projects.MlrunProject.list_alerts_configs` &mdash; Retrieve the list of alerts of a project.

### Creating alerts

> You can select an alert type for a specific model, for example "drift detection" for a given model. You must specify 

Reviewer: specifying these details is not mandatory. if the user does not provide them, default values will be used

Reviewer: see above comment

Reviewer: @jillnogold ^

Reviewer: @jillnogold ^

the frequency of alerts, and the criteria for alerts (how many times in what time window, etc.). 

> You can also configure email/slack details to send notifications.

Reviewer: email notifications are not supported ( at least for now ). we support Git, Slack, and webhook notifications.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates configuring a Slack notification for a job failure alert:
```

```
notifications = [
            {
                "kind": "slack",
                "name": "",
                "message": "Running a job has failed",
                "severity": "warning",
                "when": ["now"],
                "condition": "failed",
                "secret_params": {
                    "webhook": "https://hooks.slack.com/services/",
                },
            }
                ]
alert_data = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(
            project=project_name,
            name="failure",
            summary="Running a job has failed",
            severity="low",
            entity={"kind": "job", "project": project_name, "id": "*"},
            trigger={"events": ["failed"]},
            criteria=None,
            notifications=notifications,
        )

> 

Reviewer: updated code :

import mlrun.common.schemas.alert as alert_objects
notification = mlrun.model.Notification(
            kind="slack",
            name="slack_notification",
            message="Running a job has failed",
            severity="warning",
            when=["now"],
            condition="failed",
            secret_params={
                "webhook": "https://hooks.slack.com/services/",
            },
        ).to_dict()

notifications = [alert_objects.AlertNotification(notification=notification)]
entity_kind = alert_objects.EventEntityKind.JOB
event_name = alert_objects.EventKind.FAILED
run_id="test-func-handler"
alert_data = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(
            project=project_name,
            name="failure",
            summary="Running a job has failed",
            severity=alert_objects.AlertSeverity.LOW,
            entities=alert_objects.EventEntities(
                kind=entity_kind, project=project_name, ids=[run_id]
            ),
            trigger=alert_objects.AlertTrigger(events=[event_name]),
            criteria=None,
            notifications=notifications,
        )

project.store_alert_config(alert_data)
```

> 

Reviewer: another way to define the alert is using an alert template:

job_fail_template = project.get_alert_template("JobFailed")
alert_from_template = mlrun.alerts.alert.AlertConfig(
            project=project_name,
            name="failure",
            template=job_fail_template,
        )
entities = alert_objects.EventEntities(
            kind=alert_objects.EventEntityKind.JOB,
            project=project_name,
            ids=[run_id],
        )
alert_from_template.with_entities(entities=entities)
alert_from_template.with_notifications(notifications=notifications)
project.store_alert_config(alert_from_template)

```

> %%writefile fn.py

Reviewer: no need for this here as we want to demonstrate only creating the alert config.

def handler():
    raise Exception("This function intentionally fails")
```

> ### Monitoring alerts

Reviewer: the UI side is still not implemented, so this section is not relevant for now.
